# AI Articles: Annotated Bibliographies

### `music21`: A Toolkit for Computer-Aided Musicology and Symbolic Music Data

This article introduces a Python library called `music21` - a package to allow users to analyze musical scores at large. The platform is designed with an object-oriented approach, meaning that everything is easy to find from a programming perspective. Additionally, the syntax is incredibly easy to understand. Combined with the fact that this is written in Python, the goal of the package is to allow musicologists to learn programming incredibly fast so that `music21` can be used in their research. The package is able to undertake various music theory tasks such as write roman numeral chord progressions, iterate over notes in a specific part in a score, and generate graphs comparing various musical features throughout a piece such as pitch density. 

This paper can aid my research because it gives me an additional tool that I can use in my research. The graphing capabilities allow me to read in the music from the original Bach score and the AI generated Bach scores and compare rhythm distributions, pitch distributions, and more. Additionally, I can create the roman numeral chord progressions for each song to figure out if cadential phrases line up between the original score and the AI generated score. Finally, the package comes with every Bach chorale already imported, so I can easily find a chorale to train on.

### DeepBach: A Steerable Model for Bach Chorales Generation

DeepBach is one of the machine learning models that is capable of generating Bach-like chorales. This model is not like most other models which sample a score from left-to-right. Rather, DeepBach is able to start anywhere in the piece and still generate Bach-like chord progressions that are unique from any Bach chorales already written. Additionally, this model allows you to hold any of the four parts constant at any moment in time - most other models only let you change the soprano (melody) line. The dataset is all JS Bach chorales minus those that have instrumental parts and those that have divisis (a part that splits into two parts for a brief moment). To expand upon the size of the dataset, each chorale was transposed into every key that would fit in a singer's range. The information DeepBach was trained on the notes of every voice part, the rhythms, where fermatas occur, and the number of subdivisions in a measure (so that generated chorales can work with more than a $\frac{4}{4}$ time signature). The structure of the model is to use multiple RNNs (recurrent neural networks) to keep track of current, past, and future musical information. These results are compiled together into a fourth neural network to generate the final results. Because of the ability to keep track of all musical information, this model is able to truly compose like Bach - start from the cadential phrase and write backwards.

This model is incredibly useful for my research because of the flexibility of the model. Because of the plugin that builds on top of Musescore, I can quickly and efficiently generate AI music as I can just select which parts I want to use. Finally, this model is incredibly powerful because it is one of the few models that takes into account where fermatas are placed during training. This information is incredibly useful because Bach used fermatas to indicate the ends of phrases.

### Automatic Stylistic Composition of Bach Chorales with Deep LSTM

This paper introduces BachBot - an AI model that can reharmonize existing Bach chorales as well as generate completely new compositions in the style of JS Bach. The dataset comes from all chorales written by JS Bach. All chorales are transposed to C-major/A-minor and notes are quantized down to 16th notes. The engineers intentionally did not encode music theory concepts like motifs, phrases, chord inversions, and more in an effort for the model to actively learn music theory throughout its training with minimal prior knowledge. Chord pitches are represented from highest midi pitch to lowest midi pitch (meaning crossing voices are NOT taken into account here). Upon the results of training, the S/A parts experienced more error than the T/B parts because the model predicts from S all the way down to B. This means that the Soprano has nothing previous to build off but the B has seen all the other parts and can plan accordingly. Additionally, there were nodes in the model that were consistently predicting advanced topics in music theory, meaning that the model learned music theory during training. 

This is another model that I can use to predict music theory in my research. However, getting this model to work on my machine is going to take lots more work. I also envision that this model will generate less interesting results to sing because every generation will have to be in C-major. It will be interesting to try and feed it a melody that is **not** in the key of C and see how good the resulting AI music is.


### Coconet: The ML Model Behind Today's Bach Doodle

In 2019, Google released their first AI doodle, which is discussed about in simpler terms through this online article. The model is trained on Bach chorales. Notes are randomly erased from a Bach chorale and the model had to fill in the notes that were erased. Additionally, the model does many passes/rewrites before it generates the final output that the user sees. This was an intentional design to be more reflective of how composers today actually work - a constant cycle of write and refine. Gibbs sampling is implemented in the model generation, which is what allows the constant rewrites. The goal of this model is to give composers a tool that can help them with music generation. When they are experiencing musical writers block, they can feed the current state of their music into this model to see how the model generates the rest of the piece. From there, the composer can modify what they see fit to get the final draft of their score.

This will be another model that I can use in my research, but getting this model to work will be incredibly difficult as the documentation is lacking and the lead researcher does not respond to bugs at all.


### Counterpoint by Convolution

This is the rigorous paper that goes with the Google Bach AI Doodle. The paper adds onto the online article by noting that the model is a convolutional neural network because of its extreme versatility once trained. Data is represented as a stack of piano rolls in a binary 3D tenor. One dimension is the number of voice parts, 